
CLINKSTER - a software synthesizer for 4k intros by Blueberry / Loonies


INTRODUCTION

Clinkster is a software synthesizer (or synth, for short) designed for use in
extremely size-restricted executables, such a 4k intros. It has been under
development since 2008 and used in several 4k intros through the years. For
some background reading on the ideas behind it and its early history, refer
to the article from Zine #14 "Development Diary of Luminagia":
http://zine.bitfellas.org/article.php?zine=14&id=24


FEATURES

 - VST instrument for Windows and Mac OS X, with source
 - Simple interface: create your instruments using just 18 sliders
 - Multi-layered, delicious, voluminous stereo sound based on phase modulation
 - Unlimited number of tracks and unlimited polyphony per track
 - Player source for Windows - integrate with C++ or asm
 - Excludes unused features from player code to save space
 - Easy-exe setup for creating executable music - no coding or additional
   installation needed
 - Many example songs and instruments included


OVERVIEW

The Clinkster toolchain consists of three parts:

1. A VST instrument to use when composing the music. This can in principle be
   used with any VSTi host, but the rest of the toolchain is designed to be
   used with Renoise, so if you want to use your music in an executable, you
   will need to make your music in Renoise.

2. A conversion script - RenoiseConvert.py - to convert a Renoise song using
   Clinkster instruments into a .asm file containing the music data in the
   format needed by the executable player. To run the conversion script, you
   will need to install Python 2.x (where x >= 5).

3. Player code to include in your intro. Two versions are provided:
   clinkster.asm and clinkster_multithreaded.asm. The multithreaded version
   is bigger but computes the music twice as fast (provided you have at least
   two CPU cores). Both of these assume the converted music in music.asm.
   The clinkster.h and clinkster.inc files contain definitions for using the
   synth from C/C++ or asm, respectively. Refer to these files for detailed
   usage information.


PARAMETERS

Clinkster is designed to be used with the built-in VST parameter adjustment
GUI in Renoise.

The numbers in parentheses after the value of each parameter indicates the
byte value that will be used to represent that parameter value in the
executable version of the music. Using the same byte values across parameters
and across instruments generally leads to a more compact representation of the
music.

The sliders in Renoise have 101 different positions, and for most of the
parameters, these correspond to successive byte values. The exceptions are:
- B PitchD, M PitchD, IndexD, Attack, Decay, Release, Gain: One position for
  every two values.
- B Pitch and M Pitch: 5 positions for every 12 values (one octave).
- RandomSeed: 128 values in total.

If you want a value in between two slider-accessible values, click on the
value to access the internal representation (0% for minimum, 100% for maximum)
and modify it slightly.

As for the meaning of the individual parameters, experimentation is the key.
Be sure to test your instrument in many different octaves. To get you started,
here is a brief description of the parameters:

BaseWave, ModWave: Waveforms for the two oscillators. The ModWave modulates
    the phase of the BaseWave.
B Detune, M Detune: Randomly varies the frequencies of the two oscillators
    across layers and across the left and right channel.
B Pitch, M Pitch: Pitch the oscillator up or down relative to the played note.
B PitchD, M PitchD (pitch decay): Decay the pitch towards (or away from) the
    played note.
Index: Strength of the phase modulation.
IndexSpr (index spread): Randomly varies the modulation strength across layers
    and across the left and right channel.
IndexD (index decay): Decay the modulation strength towards (or away from)
    zero.
Layers: Number of layers of sound to compute, with individual, random
    variations controlled by the detune and index spread parameters. More
    layers give a fatter, more chorus-like sound but also increases the
    computational load of the instrument considerably.
RandomSeed: Seed used for the random variations across layers and channels.
    Adjust this until you get a balanced, in-key sound.
Attack, Decay, Sustain, Release: Control the amplitude envelope of the sound.
    Setting Sustain to a negative value creates a "double attack" where the
    amplitude crosses zero during the decay.
Gain: Amplify the sound after the amplitude envelope and apply soft clipping.
    Results in distorted or compressed sounds.

Also take a look at the included example instruments and example songs for
inspiration.


USING THE VST

In order to use the music in an executable, there are a couple of guidelines
you need to follow when creating your music in Renoise.

You can use per-note velocity, but no other in-track effect commands.

You can use any number of tracks and any number of note columns per track.

You can adjust the volume and panning of tracks using the Volume/Panning Track
DSP, the post-DSP volume/panning, the mixer and the master volume.

You can use the Delay effect (under Track DSPs) with these restrictions:
- The "L Feedb.", "R Feedb." and "Send" sliders must be at the same position.
- "Mute Src." must be off.
- No L/R Output Pan.
- If you use the Delay effect on multiple tracks, you must use the exact same
  parameters on each track.

To make it easier to control the volume and panning of a group of tracks, or
to use the same delay on multiple tracks, you can use a #Send DSP set to "Mute
Source" to route the sound from the track to a Send track. You can then set
the desired volume, panning and delay on the Send track. Only the final track
of a Send chain can use delay.

The VST is designed to run in one instance per instrument and supports
unlimited polyphony and unlimited reuse of instruments across tracks. Note
however, that if you play notes using the same instrument in multiple tracks
at the same time, Renoise will play the notes using a single VST instance and
output the result in the track in which the last note was triggered. This
works fine as long as the tracks use the same volume, panning and delay. If
this is not the case, you will need to use separate copies of the instrument
for each different track. Otherwise, you will get clicks and generally a
different result from what you expected.

In the pattern sequence matrix (available to the left of the pattern view),
you can mute individual tracks at specific positions. This muting is taken
into account by the converter.

The VST works with any sample rate. To match the sound produced by the player,
use a sample rate of 44100Hz. If your music is too computationally heavy for
your CPU to cope with, you can lighten the load by lowering the sample rate
while composing, though that will of course have a detrimental effect on the
sound quality.


USING THE CONVERTER

The RenoiseConvert.py script in the converter directory (or, equivalently,
RenoiseConvert.exe in easy_exe/tools) will convert a Renoise song using
Clinkster into a .asm file to use with the supplied player source.

During conversion, each note column in a track will become a separate track in
the converted music. If you use more than one instrument inside a single note
column, that column will be split by the converter into one track per
instrument. Also, if you have used the delay effect, all tracks using delay
will be put before the tracks not using delay.

The converter will print a list of the resulting tracks, along with the
original track / instrument combinations they correspond to.

For each track, it will print a list of tone / length / velocity combinations
used in that track, in the form NOTE/VELOCITY:LENGTH(NUMBER) or
NOTE:LENGTH(NUMBER). For instance, C-4/6A:4(32) means that C-4 notes with
velocity 6A (hex) and length 4 occur 32 times in the track. If the velocity is
omitted, it is 127 (7F hex - maximum). The number of different combinations
used in the track has influence on the size of the resulting music (as well as
its precalculation time), so this list can be useful as a guide for optimizing
your music to take up less space.

At the end, the converter prints a list of the optional features used in the
music. Each of these features has some cost in terms of the code size of the
player. The options are:

SINE, SAWTOOTH, SQUARE, PARABOLA, TRIANGLE, NOISE:
    The corresponding waveform is used in some instrument.
VELOCITY: One or more notes have velocity less than 127.
LONG_NOTES: One or more notes are longer than 127 rows.
DELAY: The delay device is used.
PANNING: One or more tracks have non-center panning.
INDEXDECAY: Some instrument has IndexDecay different from 0.
GAIN: Some instrument has Gain different from 1.


FEEDBACK

I am always very interested in hearing about your adventures with Clinkster,
and to help out if you encounter problems.

Send stories, comments, bug reports and questions to blueberry@loonies.dk or
post them to the Pouet forum at http://pouet.net/prod.php?which=61592


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thanks to all the people who have tried out this synth (as musician and/or
coder) and given good feedback for its development: Bod, Bstrr, Curt Cool,
Eladamri, El Blanco, Farfar, Garfferen, Hardy, Lemmus, Loaderror, Maytz,
Neoman, Psycho, Punqtured, Response, Seven, TheT, Xerxes, and the ones I
have forgotten.

